---
title: Linux
date: 2022-12-19 +0000
categories: [bash,terminal,shell,linux]
tags: [servers,bash,terminal,linux,documentation,automation,shell,ssh]
---

## Distributions

### Arch Linux

[get iso](https://archlinux.org/download/)

If you want a graphical install or install without manuall partitioning you can use the install script by typing `archinstall` or use [EndeavourOS](https://endeavouros.com/latest-release/)
<br>
Arch Linux is a Linux distribution for computers based on the x86-64 architecture. It is a rolling release distribution, which means that it does not have a release cycle. Instead, new versions of packages are released as soon as they are ready. This allows Arch Linux to always be up-to-date but also means that it is not as stable as other distributions and you can break it if you don't know what your doing.<br>
You may have to change the keyboard layout.

```bash
loadkeys de
```

To change it permanently edit `/etc/vconsole.conf` and add `KEYMAP=de` to it.

#### Installation over wifi

You can check if the WiFi is blocked by running `rfkill list`.<br>
If it says **Soft blocked: yes**, then run `rfkill unblock wifi`

After unblocking the WiFi, you can connect to it. Go through these 5 steps:

* Run `iwctl`
* Run `device list`, and find your device name.
* Run `station [device name] scan`
* Run `station [device name] get-networks`
* Find your network, and run `station [device name] connect [network name]`, enter your password and run `exit`. You can test if you have internet connection by running `ping github.com`, and then Press Ctrl and C to stop the ping test.

#### Package Manager

* update all packages `sodp pacman -Syu --noconfirm`
* install a package `sudo pacman -S --noconfirm <package>`
* remove a package `sudo pacman -R --noconfirm <package>`
* list installed packages `pacman -Q`
* search for a package `pacman -Ss <package>`

You can add `--noconfirm` to execute without confirmation. <br>
If you want to install a package from the AUR (like vscode) you can use [yay](https://saracenrhue.github.io/posts/yay/) or paru.

### Debian

[get iso](https://cdimage.debian.org/cdimage/unofficial/non-free/cd-including-firmware/weekly-builds/amd64/iso-cd/)

Debian is a Linux distribution composed of free and open-source software, developed by the community-supported Debian Project. The Debian Project was first announced on August 16, 1993 by Ian Murdock. The Debian stable distribution is maintained by the Debian Stable Release Team. It is the most popular Linux distribution for servers. It is stable and secure, but most of the time it is not the latest version of the software.

#### Package Manager

* update all packages `sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade -y`
* install a package `sudo apt install -y <package>`
* remove a package `sudo apt remove -y <package>`
* list installed packages `dpkg -l`
* search for a package `apt search <package>`

You can add `-y` to execute without confirmation.

### Fedora

[get iso](https://getfedora.org/en/server/download/)

Fedora is a Linux distribution developed by the community-supported Fedora Project and owned by Red Hat. It is a free and open-source operating system based on the Linux kernel and GNU packages. It is sponsored by Red Hat and is a part of the Red Hat Enterprise Linux family. It is the most popular Linux distribution for desktops. It is stable and secure.

#### Package Manager

* update all packages `sudo dnf update && sudo dnf upgrade -y`
* install a package `sudo dnf install -y <package>`
* remove a package `sudo dnf remove -y <package>`
* list installed packages `rpm -qa`
* search for a package `dnf search <package>`

You can add `-y` to execute without confirmation.

### NixOS

[get iso](https://nixos.org/download.html)

NixOS is a Linux distribution based on the Nix package manager. It is a free and open-source operating system that is declarative, purely functional, and multi-user. The entire system is configured in a configuration file with makes it easy to reproduce and share. It is stable, secure and up to date.

#### Package Manager

* update all packages `nix-env -u`
* install packages `nix-env -iA nixos.<packagename>`
* erase packages `nix-env -e <packagename>`
* list installed packages `nix-env -q`
* search for a package `nix-env -qaP | grep <packagename>`

You can use the `nix` packagemanager seperatlly from NixOS on all Unix based OS.

[search nix packages](https://search.nixos.org/packages) <br>
[nix packagemanager](https://saracenrhue.github.io/posts/nix/)

## sudo

Repeat last command with sudo

```bash
sudo !!
```

## ssh

## ssh into a server

```bash
ssh username@server_ip
```

### ssh into a server with a specific port

```bash
ssh -p 2222 username@server_ip
```

## send a command to a server

```bash
ssh username@server_ip "ls"
```

## send a file to a server

```bash
scp file.txt username@server_ip:/home/username/
```

## get a file from a server

```bash
scp username@server_ip:/home/username/file.txt .
```

## sshpass

### sshpass into a server

```bash
sshpass -p "password" ssh username@server_ip
```

### send a command to a server with sshpass

```bash
sshpass -p "password" ssh username@server_ip "ls"
```

### send file to a server with sshpass

```bash
sshpass -p "password" scp file.txt username@server_ip:/home/username/
```

## Systemd Commands

### systemctl start

Start a service:

```bash
systemctl start service_name
```

### systemctl stop

Stop a service:

```bash
systemctl stop service_name
```

### systemctl restart

Restart a service:

```bash
systemctl restart service_name
```

### systemctl enable

Enable a service:

```bash
systemctl enable service_name --now
```

### systemctl disable

Disable a service:

```bash
systemctl disable service_name
```

### systemctl status

Check the status of a service:

```bash
systemctl status service_name
```

### systemctl list-units

List all units:

```bash
systemctl list-units
```

## virsh

`virsh` is a command line tool for managing virtual machines.<br>
It is part of the `libvirt` package.

### virsh list

```bash
virsh list --all
```

### virsh start

start a virtual machine

```bash
virsh start vm_name
```

### virsh shutdown

shutdown a virtual machine

```bash
virsh shutdown vm_name
```

### virsh destroy

destroy a virtual machine

```bash
virsh destroy vm_name
```

### virsh undefine

undefine a virtual machine (remove it from the list)

```bash
virsh undefine vm_name
```

### virsh console

connect to the console of a virtual machine

```bash
virsh console vm_name
```

### virsh create snapshot

create a snapshot of a virtual machine

```bash
virsh snapshot-create-as vm_name snapshot_name
```

### virsh snapshot-list

list all snapshots of a virtual machine

```bash
virsh snapshot-list vm_name
```

### virsh snapshot-revert

revert a virtual machine to a snapshot

```bash
virsh snapshot-revert vm_name snapshot_name
```

### virsh snapshot-delete

delete a snapshot of a virtual machine

```bash
virsh snapshot-delete vm_name snapshot_name
```

## System checks

### Checking the ram

```bash
dmidecode --type 17
```


